---
title: Deploy a TOM to Heroku
---

[Heroku](https://heroku.com) is a
[PaaS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platform_as_a_service) which allows you to
easily deploy web applications (like a TOM) to public servers without the need for
managing any of the underlying infrastructure yourself.

Put simply: Heroku lets you make your TOM publicly available without needing to
run servers, open firewall rules, manage domain names, etc. You simply push your
code and Heroku will run your website for you.

The service has a free tier that should be more than adequate for TOMs handling
10s of users. However note that the free tier processing power is limited, so if
you plan on doing lots of expensive processing on your data, you might want to
look into alternatives.


## Example code repository

There is an example code repository,
[TOMToolkit/herokutom](https://github.com/TOMToolkit/herokutom), which contains the
minimal setup required to run a TOM in Heroku. It is running at
[https://herokutom.herokuapp.com/](https://herokutom.herokuapp.com/).


## Prerequisites

1. You should have a local TOM up and running following the instructions in the
[getting started](/docs/getting_started) guide.
2. You should be familiar with basic git commands.

## Push your code to Github.
This guide will use the
[Github integration](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/github-integration)
method for deploying to Heroku. This way, we can tell Heroku to redeploy your TOM
each time we push changes to Github. Note: It's possible to [deploy to
Heroku](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git) without using Github, but
you'll still need git.

If you haven't already, push your TOM's code to Github. If you are unfamiliar with
Git and Github, [there are many tutorials
online](https://guides.github.com/activities/hello-world/) for getting started,
though the specifics are beyond the scope of this tutorial.

Once you have your code up on Github, you're ready to move on to the next step.

## Sign up for Heroku and create an app

First, start off by [signing up for a Heroku account](https://signup.heroku.com/).

Once you have logged in to your account, Heroku will ask you to start a new
project. Give it a name, but leave the pipeline stuff alone for now.

After creating an app you'll be presented with a choice of Deployment methods.
Choose Github and click the "Connect to Github" button.

![deployment methods](/assets/img/heroku_deploy_doc/githubintegration.png)

Once you have given Heroku access to your Github account and found your repo, your
app should successfully be connected and your deployment dashboard should look
like this:

![github connected](/assets/img/heroku_deploy_doc/githubconnected.png)


That's it for now, we'll return to this page after we've made some modifications
to our TOM to make it work with Heroku.

## Make your TOM Heroku ready

There are a few additions we'll need to make to our TOM before it can run in
Heroku. If you'd like to follow Heroku's guide directly, you can find it
[here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/django-app-configuration).

### Defining project dependencies with requirements.txt

If you haven't already, define a `requirements.txt` file. This is a file which is
used to list dependencies of your project. Heroku expects it so it knows which
python packages it needs to install to run your app. It should look something like
this:

    dataclasses
    django
    https://github.com/TOMToolkit/tom_base/archive/master.zip

Let's add 2 more lines: one for [gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/), a high
performance http server and
[django-heroku](https://github.com/heroku/django-heroku) a utility that helps
autoconfigure Django projects for Heroku. Our `requirements.txt` file should now
look something like this:

    dataclasses
    django
    https://github.com/TOMToolkit/tom_base/archive/master.zip
    gunicorn
    django-heroku

You can make sure it works locally by installing your `requirements.txt`
dependencies with `pip`:

    pip install -r requirements.txt

### Settings.py changes

Now we need to edit our projects `settings.py` file to make it work with Heroku.
At the top of the file, we should import django_heroku:

```python
import django_heroku
```

At the bottom of the file, we'll call a method to autoconfigure our project:

```python
django_heroku.settings(locals())
```

### Adding a Procfile

Heroku requires the presence of a `Procfile` in your project. This file tells
Heroku how it is supposed to launch your app. Create a file `Procfile` in the root
of your project and add these contents:

    release: python manage.py migrate --noinput
    web: gunicorn mytom.wsgi

**Make sure to change mytom.wsgi above to the actual name of your project!**

Note on the `release` command: you might want to remove this line if you'd like to
have manual control over when your migrations are run in the future. This is
simply a convenience for now.


### Push to Github and deploy

Once you have made the necessary modifications to `settings.py` above, you should
make a commit and push your code to Github.

Now, navigate back to your app's dashboard on Heroku. Under the deploy tab, you
should see a section for Manual deploy, at the bottom, with a button "Deploy
Branch".


![deploy branch](/assets/img/heroku_deploy_doc/herokudeploybranch.png)

Select the branch to deploy (usually "master") and click the "Deploy Branch"
button. Heroku will begin launching your app. If all goes well, you should see
something like this:

![branch deployed](/assets/img/heroku_deploy_doc/branchdeployed.png)

Your TOM should now be running at https://<<appname>>.herokuapp.com.
Congratulations!

### Next steps

You should spend some time familiarizing yourself with how Heroku works. As you
may have noticed, there are many configuration options and workflows available.
For example, just above the "Manual Deploy" section we used, there is a setting
that allows Heroku to automatically deploy your app when you push code to Github.

Also note that Heroku has limitations, especially around storing data on disk. By
default, **Heroku only keeps files on disk for a maximum of 24 hours**. If you
plan on storing data in your tom (as opposed to your local machine) you might
consider using a cloud storage service like [Amazon
S3](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/s3).

